---
category: "getting-started"
title: "Quickstart"
description: "Learn the basics and fundamentals to get started easily"
order: 1
---

# Quickstart
---

Toucan is a modern static site generator, written in Swift, that converts Markdown files into HTML files using a theme.

## Prerequisites

Familiarity with using the command line is highly recommended, as many of the steps in this guide involve executing commands in a terminal. If you're new to the command line, consider reviewing a basic tutorial to get comfortable with navigating directories and running commands.

- [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/)
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/)

Install the command line utility or use the official Docker image to generate a static website using Toucan. To install Toucan, run the following commands:

```sh
# macOS
brew install toucansites/toucan/toucan

# Linux (deb)
wget https://github.com/toucansites/toucan/releases/download/1.0.0.beta.5/toucan-linux-amd64-1.0.0.beta.5.deb
sudo dpkg -i toucan-linux-amd64-1.0.0.beta.5.deb

# Linux (rpm)
wget https://github.com/toucansites/toucan/releases/download/1.0.0.beta.5/toucan-linux-x86_64-1.0.0.beta.5.rpm
sudo rpm -i toucan-linux-x86_64-1.0.0.beta.5.rpm

# verify installation
toucan --version
```

Alternatively, you can use Docker to run the static site generation without installing Toucan. Make sure you have docker up and running on your system.

```sh
# verify docker installation
docker --version
```

If you don't know how to install brew or Docker, please refer to our complete installation guide.

## Minimal example

To get started with Toucan, let's create a minimal example project as a foundation.

Run the following command to initialize a new site:

```sh
toucan init
```

This command will download a minimal starter theme and set up a basic website within a newly created `site` directory, providing everything you need to begin.

> **Tip:** Use `toucan init my-site` to create a custom folder named `my-site` instead of the default `site`.

The newly created `site` directory will include all the source materials for your website, such as the `src` directory, which contains contents, pipelines, themes, and content type definitions. To generate the final website, you need to render the source materials. This process converts the Markdown files and other assets into the final HTML files using the render pipeline.

To generate the final website content, execute the following commands:

```sh
# Navigate to the site directory
cd site
# Generate the final website
toucan generate
#2025-04-15T18:03:52+0200 info toucan : baseUrl=nil input=./src output=./docs [toucan_generate] Site generated successfully.
```

The generated website files will be located in a newly created `docs` folder. You can host these files on a file server or use a static website hosting provider, such as GitHub Pages. If you choose to host the site, ensure that the correct [base URL](/docs/getting-started/commands/) is configured, which corresponds to your domain name. 

Currently, the `docs` folder contains a local development version of the website. To preview it, run the following command:

```sh
toucan serve
```
Now, navigate to [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) in your browser to view your newly created website. You should see a basic static website generated by Toucan. 

Congratulations! You've successfully built your first static website using Toucan.

## Source Materials

The `src` directory serves as the foundation of your website, housing all the essential source materials required to build your static site. This includes content files, themes, and configuration files. Below is an overview of the directory structure:

```sh
.
└── src
    ├── assets
    ├── blocks
    ├── config.yml
    ├── contents
    │   ├── 404
    │   │   └── index.md
    │   ├── assets
    │   ├── index.md
    │   ├── about
    │   │   └── index.yml
    │   └── sitemap.xml
    │       └── index.yml
    ├── pipelines
    ├── site.yml
    ├── themes
    └── types
```

- The `config.yml` file contains Toucan-specific configurations. You can learn more about it in the next guide.
- The `contents` folder is where you store Markdown files and public assets, such as JavaScript, CSS, or images. For example:
    - `index.md` serves as your home page toghether with the `assets` folder.
    - `about/index.md` represents an about page.
    - `404/index.md` corresponds to the "not found" page.
- The `sitemap.xml` directory, with its `index.yml` file, provides a basic sitemap for your website.
- The `site.yml` file allows you to configure site-related properties, such as the name, description, base URL (domain name), and navigation structure. You can also define additional variables here to pass context to your template files. Refer to the template guides for more details.

To see changes reflected on your website, modify files in the `contents` directory and regenerate the site. Toucan offers a built-in `watch` command to streamline this process. It monitors file changes in the source directory and automatically regenerates the site:

```sh
toucan watch
```

With the `toucan serve` command running in a terminal, refresh your browser (ensure the cache is disabled) to instantly view updates made to the source directory.

For more insights into how Toucan works, explore our guides or review open-source reference projects. Additional documentation and tutorials will be available soon. If you have any questions, feel free to reach out to us.
